<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">How the Pickwickians made and cultivated the acquaintance of a couple of nice young men belonging to one of the liberal professions; how they disported themselves on the ice; and how their visit came to a conclusion.</p>
			</header>
			<p>“Well, Sam,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, as that favoured servitor entered his bedchamber, with his warm water, on the morning of Christmas Day, “still frosty?”</p>
			<p>“Water in the wash-hand basin’s a mask o’ ice, Sir,” responded Sam.</p>
			<p>“Severe weather, Sam,” observed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“Fine time for them as is well wropped up, as the Polar bear said to himself, ven he was practising his skating,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller.</p>
			<p>“I shall be down in a quarter of an hour, Sam,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, untying his nightcap.</p>
			<p>“Wery good, sir,” replied Sam. “There’s a couple o’ sawbones downstairs.”</p>
			<p>“A couple of what!” exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, sitting up in bed.</p>
			<p>“A couple o’ sawbones,” said Sam.</p>
			<p>“What’s a sawbones?” inquired <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, not quite certain whether it was a live animal, or something to eat.</p>
			<p>“What! Don’t you know what a sawbones is, sir?” inquired <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller. “I thought everybody know’d as a sawbones was a surgeon.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, a surgeon, eh?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, with a smile.</p>
			<p>“Just that, sir,” replied Sam. “These here ones as is below, though, ain’t reg’lar thoroughbred sawbones; they’re only in trainin’.”</p>
			<p>“In other words they’re medical students, I suppose?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>Sam Weller nodded assent.</p>
			<p>“I am glad of it,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, casting his nightcap energetically on the counterpane. “They are fine fellows⁠—very fine fellows; with judgments matured by observation and reflection; and tastes refined by reading and study. I am very glad of it.”</p>
			<p>“They’re a-smokin’ cigars by the kitchen fire,” said Sam.</p>
			<p>“Ah!” observed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, rubbing his hands, “overflowing with kindly feelings and animal spirits. Just what I like to see.”</p>
			<p>“And one on ’em,” said Sam, not noticing his master’s interruption, “one on ’em’s got his legs on the table, and is a-drinking brandy neat, vile the t’other one⁠—him in the barnacles⁠—has got a barrel o’ oysters atween his knees, which he’s a-openin’ like steam, and as fast as he eats ’em, he takes a aim vith the shells at young dropsy, who’s a sittin’ down fast asleep, in the chimbley corner.”</p>
			<p>“Eccentricities of genius, Sam,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick. “You may retire.”</p>
			<p>Sam did retire accordingly. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick at the expiration of the quarter of an hour, went down to breakfast.</p>
			<p>“Here he is at last!” said old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wardle. “Pickwick, this is Miss Allen’s brother, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Benjamin Allen. Ben we call him, and so may you, if you like. This gentleman is his very particular friend, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>⁠—”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer,” interposed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Benjamin Allen; whereupon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Benjamin Allen laughed in concert.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick bowed to Bob Sawyer, and Bob Sawyer bowed to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick. Bob and his very particular friend then applied themselves most assiduously to the eatables before them; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick had an opportunity of glancing at them both.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Benjamin Allen was a coarse, stout, thickset young man, with black hair cut rather short, and a white face cut rather long. He was embellished with spectacles, and wore a white neckerchief. Below his single-breasted black surtout, which was buttoned up to his chin, appeared the usual number of pepper-and-salt coloured legs, terminating in a pair of imperfectly polished boots. Although his coat was short in the sleeves, it disclosed no vestige of a linen wristband; and although there was quite enough of his face to admit of the encroachment of a shirt collar, it was not graced by the smallest approach to that appendage. He presented, altogether, rather a mildewy appearance, and emitted a fragrant odour of full-flavoured Cubas.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer, who was habited in a coarse, blue coat, which, without being either a greatcoat or a surtout, partook of the nature and qualities of both, had about him that sort of slovenly smartness, and swaggering gait, which is peculiar to young gentlemen who smoke in the streets by day, shout and scream in the same by night, call waiters by their Christian names, and do various other acts and deeds of an equally facetious description. He wore a pair of plaid trousers, and a large, rough, double-breasted waistcoat; out of doors, he carried a thick stick with a big top. He eschewed gloves, and looked, upon the whole, something like a dissipated Robinson Crusoe.</p>
			<p>Such were the two worthies to whom <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick was introduced, as he took his seat at the breakfast-table on Christmas morning.</p>
			<p>“Splendid morning, gentlemen,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer slightly nodded his assent to the proposition, and asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Benjamin Allen for the mustard.</p>
			<p>“Have you come far this morning, gentlemen?” inquired <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“Blue Lion at Muggleton,” briefly responded <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allen.</p>
			<p>“You should have joined us last night,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“So we should,” replied Bob Sawyer, “but the brandy was too good to leave in a hurry; wasn’t it, Ben?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Benjamin Allen; “and the cigars were not bad, or the pork-chops either; were they, Bob?”</p>
			<p>“Decidedly not,” said Bob. The particular friends resumed their attack upon the breakfast, more freely than before, as if the recollection of last night’s supper had imparted a new relish to the meal.</p>
			<p>“Peg away, Bob,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allen, to his companion, encouragingly.</p>
			<p>“So I do,” replied Bob Sawyer. And so, to do him justice, he did.</p>
			<p>“Nothing like dissecting, to give one an appetite,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer, looking round the table.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick slightly shuddered.</p>
			<p>“By the by, Bob,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allen, “have you finished that leg yet?”</p>
			<p>“Nearly,” replied Sawyer, helping himself to half a fowl as he spoke. “It’s a very muscular one for a child’s.”</p>
			<p>“Is it?” inquired <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allen carelessly.</p>
			<p>“Very,” said Bob Sawyer, with his mouth full.</p>
			<p>“I’ve put my name down for an arm at our place,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allen. “We’re clubbing for a subject, and the list is nearly full, only we can’t get hold of any fellow that wants a head. I wish you’d take it.”</p>
			<p>“No,” replied Bob Sawyer; “can’t afford expensive luxuries.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense!” said Allen.</p>
			<p>“Can’t, indeed,” rejoined Bob Sawyer, “I wouldn’t mind a brain, but I couldn’t stand a whole head.”</p>
			<p>“Hush, hush, gentlemen, pray,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, “I hear the ladies.”</p>
			<p>As <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick spoke, the ladies, gallantly escorted by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Messrs.</abbr> Snodgrass, Winkle, and Tupman, returned from an early walk.</p>
			<p>“Why, Ben!” said Arabella, in a tone which expressed more surprise than pleasure at the sight of her brother.</p>
			<p>“Come to take you home tomorrow,” replied Benjamin.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle turned pale.</p>
			<p>“Don’t you see Bob Sawyer, Arabella?” inquired <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Benjamin Allen, somewhat reproachfully. Arabella gracefully held out her hand, in acknowledgment of Bob Sawyer’s presence. A thrill of hatred struck to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle’s heart, as Bob Sawyer inflicted on the proffered hand a perceptible squeeze.</p>
			<p>“Ben, dear!” said Arabella, blushing; “have⁠—have⁠—you been introduced to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle?”</p>
			<p>“I have not been, but I shall be very happy to be, Arabella,” replied her brother gravely. Here <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allen bowed grimly to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle, while <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer glanced mutual distrust out of the corners of their eyes.</p>
			<p>The arrival of the two new visitors, and the consequent check upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle and the young lady with the fur round her boots, would in all probability have proved a very unpleasant interruption to the hilarity of the party, had not the cheerfulness of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, and the good humour of the host, been exerted to the very utmost for the common weal. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle gradually insinuated himself into the good graces of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Benjamin Allen, and even joined in a friendly conversation with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer; who, enlivened with the brandy, and the breakfast, and the talking, gradually ripened into a state of extreme facetiousness, and related with much glee an agreeable anecdote, about the removal of a tumour on some gentleman’s head, which he illustrated by means of an oyster-knife and a half-quartern loaf, to the great edification of the assembled company. Then the whole train went to church, where <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Benjamin Allen fell fast asleep; while <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer abstracted his thoughts from worldly matters, by the ingenious process of carving his name on the seat of the pew, in corpulent letters of four inches long.</p>
			<p>“Now,” said Wardle, after a substantial lunch, with the agreeable items of strong beer and cherry-brandy, had been done ample justice to, “what say you to an hour on the ice? We shall have plenty of time.”</p>
			<p>“Capital!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Benjamin Allen.</p>
			<p>“Prime!” ejaculated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer.</p>
			<p>“You skate, of course, Winkle?” said Wardle.</p>
			<p>“Ye-yes; oh, yes,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle. “I⁠—I⁠—am <em>rather</em> out of practice.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, <em>do</em> skate, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle,” said Arabella. “I like to see it so much.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, it is <em>so</em> graceful,” said another young lady.</p>
			<p>A third young lady said it was elegant, and a fourth expressed her opinion that it was “swan-like.”</p>
			<p>“I should be very happy, I’m sure,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle, reddening; “but I have no skates.”</p>
			<p>This objection was at once overruled. Trundle had a couple of pair, and the fat boy announced that there were half a dozen more downstairs; whereat <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle expressed exquisite delight, and looked exquisitely uncomfortable.</p>
			<p>Old Wardle led the way to a pretty large sheet of ice; and the fat boy and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller, having shovelled and swept away the snow which had fallen on it during the night, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer adjusted his skates with a dexterity which to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle was perfectly marvellous, and described circles with his left leg, and cut figures of eight, and inscribed upon the ice, without once stopping for breath, a great many other pleasant and astonishing devices, to the excessive satisfaction of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tupman, and the ladies; which reached a pitch of positive enthusiasm, when old Wardle and Benjamin Allen, assisted by the aforesaid Bob Sawyer, performed some mystic evolutions, which they called a reel.</p>
			<p>All this time, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle, with his face and hands blue with the cold, had been forcing a gimlet into the sole of his feet, and putting his skates on, with the points behind, and getting the straps into a very complicated and entangled state, with the assistance of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Snodgrass, who knew rather less about skates than a Hindu. At length, however, with the assistance of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller, the unfortunate skates were firmly screwed and buckled on, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle was raised to his feet.</p>
			<p>“Now, then, Sir,” said Sam, in an encouraging tone; “off vith you, and show ’em how to do it.”</p>
			<p>“Stop, Sam, stop!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle, trembling violently, and clutching hold of Sam’s arms with the grasp of a drowning man. “How slippery it is, Sam!”</p>
			<p>“Not an uncommon thing upon ice, Sir,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller. “Hold up, Sir!”</p>
			<p>This last observation of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller’s bore reference to a demonstration <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle made at the instant, of a frantic desire to throw his feet in the air, and dash the back of his head on the ice.</p>
			<p>“These⁠—these⁠—are very awkward skates; ain’t they, Sam?” inquired <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle, staggering.</p>
			<p>“I’m afeerd there’s a orkard gen’l’m’n in ’em, Sir,” replied Sam.</p>
			<p>“Now, Winkle,” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, quite unconscious that there was anything the matter. “Come; the ladies are all anxiety.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle, with a ghastly smile. “I’m coming.”</p>
			<p>“Just a-goin’ to begin,” said Sam, endeavouring to disengage himself. “Now, Sir, start off!”</p>
			<p>“Stop an instant, Sam,” gasped <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle, clinging most affectionately to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller. “I find I’ve got a couple of coats at home that I don’t want, Sam. You may have them, Sam.”</p>
			<p>“Thank’ee, Sir,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller.</p>
			<p>“Never mind touching your hat, Sam,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle hastily. “You needn’t take your hand away to do that. I meant to have given you five shillings this morning for a Christmas box, Sam. I’ll give it you this afternoon, Sam.”</p>
			<p>“You’re wery good, sir,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller.</p>
			<p>“Just hold me at first, Sam; will you?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle. “There⁠—that’s right. I shall soon get in the way of it, Sam. Not too fast, Sam; not too fast.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle, stooping forward, with his body half doubled up, was being assisted over the ice by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller, in a very singular and un-swan-like manner, when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick most innocently shouted from the opposite bank⁠—</p>
			<p>“Sam!”</p>
			<p>“Sir?”</p>
			<p>“Here. I want you.”</p>
			<p>“Let go, Sir,” said Sam. “Don’t you hear the governor a-callin’? Let go, sir.”</p>
			<p>With a violent effort, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller disengaged himself from the grasp of the agonised Pickwickian, and, in so doing, administered a considerable impetus to the unhappy <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle. With an accuracy which no degree of dexterity or practice could have insured, that unfortunate gentleman bore swiftly down into the centre of the reel, at the very moment when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer was performing a flourish of unparalleled beauty. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle struck wildly against him, and with a loud crash they both fell heavily down. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick ran to the spot. Bob Sawyer had risen to his feet, but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle was far too wise to do anything of the kind, in skates. He was seated on the ice, making spasmodic efforts to smile; but anguish was depicted on every lineament of his countenance.</p>
			<p>“Are you hurt?” inquired <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Benjamin Allen, with great anxiety.</p>
			<p>“Not much,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle, rubbing his back very hard.</p>
			<p>“I wish you’d let me bleed you,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Benjamin, with great eagerness.</p>
			<p>“No, thank you,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle hurriedly.</p>
			<p>“I really think you had better,” said Allen.</p>
			<p>“Thank you,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle; “I’d rather not.”</p>
			<p>“What do <em>you</em> think, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick?” inquired Bob Sawyer.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick was excited and indignant. He beckoned to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller, and said in a stern voice, “Take his skates off.”</p>
			<p>“No; but really I had scarcely begun,” remonstrated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle.</p>
			<p>“Take his skates off,” repeated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick firmly.</p>
			<p>The command was not to be resisted. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle allowed Sam to obey it, in silence.</p>
			<p>“Lift him up,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick. Sam assisted him to rise.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick retired a few paces apart from the bystanders; and, beckoning his friend to approach, fixed a searching look upon him, and uttered in a low, but distinct and emphatic tone, these remarkable words⁠—</p>
			<p>“You’re a humbug, sir.”</p>
			<p>“A what?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle, starting.</p>
			<p>“A humbug, Sir. I will speak plainer, if you wish it. An impostor, sir.”</p>
			<p>With those words, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick turned slowly on his heel, and rejoined his friends.</p>
			<p>While <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick was delivering himself of the sentiment just recorded, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller and the fat boy, having by their joint endeavours cut out a slide, were exercising themselves thereupon, in a very masterly and brilliant manner. Sam Weller, in particular, was displaying that beautiful feat of fancy-sliding which is currently denominated “knocking at the cobbler’s door,” and which is achieved by skimming over the ice on one foot, and occasionally giving a postman’s knock upon it with the other. It was a good long slide, and there was something in the motion which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, who was very cold with standing still, could not help envying.</p>
			<p>“It looks a nice warm exercise that, doesn’t it?” he inquired of Wardle, when that gentleman was thoroughly out of breath, by reason of the indefatigable manner in which he had converted his legs into a pair of compasses, and drawn complicated problems on the ice.</p>
			<p>“Ah, it does, indeed,” replied Wardle. “Do you slide?”</p>
			<p>“I used to do so, on the gutters, when I was a boy,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“Try it now,” said Wardle.</p>
			<p>“Oh, do, please, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick!” cried all the ladies.</p>
			<p>“I should be very happy to afford you any amusement,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, “but I haven’t done such a thing these thirty years.”</p>
			<p>“Pooh! pooh! Nonsense!” said Wardle, dragging off his skates with the impetuosity which characterised all his proceedings. “Here; I’ll keep you company; come along!” And away went the good-tempered old fellow down the slide, with a rapidity which came very close upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller, and beat the fat boy all to nothing.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick paused, considered, pulled off his gloves and put them in his hat; took two or three short runs, baulked himself as often, and at last took another run, and went slowly and gravely down the slide, with his feet about a yard and a quarter apart, amidst the gratified shouts of all the spectators.</p>
			<p>“Keep the pot a-bilin’, Sir!” said Sam; and down went Wardle again, and then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, and then Sam, and then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle, and then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer, and then the fat boy, and then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Snodgrass, following closely upon each other’s heels, and running after each other with as much eagerness as if their future prospects in life depended on their expedition.</p>
			<p>It was the most intensely interesting thing, to observe the manner in which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick performed his share in the ceremony; to watch the torture of anxiety with which he viewed the person behind, gaining upon him at the imminent hazard of tripping him up; to see him gradually expend the painful force he had put on at first, and turn slowly round on the slide, with his face towards the point from which he had started; to contemplate the playful smile which mantled on his face when he had accomplished the distance, and the eagerness with which he turned round when he had done so, and ran after his predecessor, his black gaiters tripping pleasantly through the snow, and his eyes beaming cheerfulness and gladness through his spectacles. And when he was knocked down (which happened upon the average every third round), it was the most invigorating sight that can possibly be imagined, to behold him gather up his hat, gloves, and handkerchief, with a glowing countenance, and resume his station in the rank, with an ardour and enthusiasm that nothing could abate.</p>
			<p>The sport was at its height, the sliding was at the quickest, the laughter was at the loudest, when a sharp smart crack was heard. There was a quick rush towards the bank, a wild scream from the ladies, and a shout from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tupman. A large mass of ice disappeared; the water bubbled up over it; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick’s hat, gloves, and handkerchief were floating on the surface; and this was all of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick that anybody could see.</p>
			<p>Dismay and anguish were depicted on every countenance; the males turned pale, and the females fainted; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Snodgrass and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle grasped each other by the hand, and gazed at the spot where their leader had gone down, with frenzied eagerness; while <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tupman, by way of rendering the promptest assistance, and at the same time conveying to any persons who might be within hearing, the clearest possible notion of the catastrophe, ran off across the country at his utmost speed, screaming “Fire!” with all his might.</p>
			<p>It was at this moment, when old Wardle and Sam Weller were approaching the hole with cautious steps, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Benjamin Allen was holding a hurried consultation with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer on the advisability of bleeding the company generally, as an improving little bit of professional practice⁠—it was at this very moment, that a face, head, and shoulders, emerged from beneath the water, and disclosed the features and spectacles of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“Keep yourself up for an instant⁠—for only one instant!” bawled <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Snodgrass.</p>
			<p>“Yes, do; let me implore you⁠—for my sake!” roared <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle, deeply affected. The adjuration was rather unnecessary; the probability being, that if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick had declined to keep himself up for anybody else’s sake, it would have occurred to him that he might as well do so, for his own.</p>
			<p>“Do you feel the bottom there, old fellow?” said Wardle.</p>
			<p>“Yes, certainly,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, wringing the water from his head and face, and gasping for breath. “I fell upon my back. I couldn’t get on my feet at first.”</p>
			<p>The clay upon so much of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick’s coat as was yet visible, bore testimony to the accuracy of this statement; and as the fears of the spectators were still further relieved by the fat boy’s suddenly recollecting that the water was nowhere more than five feet deep, prodigies of valour were performed to get him out. After a vast quantity of splashing, and cracking, and struggling, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick was at length fairly extricated from his unpleasant position, and once more stood on dry land.</p>
			<p>“Oh, he’ll catch his death of cold,” said Emily.</p>
			<p>“Dear old thing!” said Arabella. “Let me wrap this shawl round you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, that’s the best thing you can do,” said Wardle; “and when you’ve got it on, run home as fast as your legs can carry you, and jump into bed directly.”</p>
			<p>A dozen shawls were offered on the instant. Three or four of the thickest having been selected, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick was wrapped up, and started off, under the guidance of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller; presenting the singular phenomenon of an elderly gentleman, dripping wet, and without a hat, with his arms bound down to his sides, skimming over the ground, without any clearly-defined purpose, at the rate of six good English miles an hour.</p>
			<p>But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick cared not for appearances in such an extreme case, and urged on by Sam Weller, he kept at the very top of his speed until he reached the door of Manor Farm, where <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tupman had arrived some five minutes before, and had frightened the old lady into palpitations of the heart by impressing her with the unalterable conviction that the kitchen chimney was on fire⁠—a calamity which always presented itself in glowing colours to the old lady’s mind, when anybody about her evinced the smallest agitation.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick paused not an instant until he was snug in bed. Sam Weller lighted a blazing fire in the room, and took up his dinner; a bowl of punch was carried up afterwards, and a grand carouse held in honour of his safety. Old Wardle would not hear of his rising, so they made the bed the chair, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick presided. A second and a third bowl were ordered in; and when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick awoke next morning, there was not a symptom of rheumatism about him; which proves, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer very justly observed, that there is nothing like hot punch in such cases; and that if ever hot punch did fail to act as a preventive, it was merely because the patient fell into the vulgar error of not taking enough of it.</p>
			<p>The jovial party broke up next morning. Breakings-up are capital things in our schooldays, but in after life they are painful enough. Death, self-interest, and fortune’s changes, are every day breaking up many a happy group, and scattering them far and wide; and the boys and girls never come back again. We do not mean to say that it was exactly the case in this particular instance; all we wish to inform the reader is, that the different members of the party dispersed to their several homes; that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick and his friends once more took their seats on the top of the Muggleton coach; and that Arabella Allen repaired to her place of destination, wherever it might have been⁠—we dare say <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle knew, but we confess we don’t⁠—under the care and guardianship of her brother Benjamin, and his most intimate and particular friend, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer.</p>
			<p>Before they separated, however, that gentleman and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Benjamin Allen drew <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick aside with an air of some mystery; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer, thrusting his forefinger between two of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick’s ribs, and thereby displaying his native drollery, and his knowledge of the anatomy of the human frame, at one and the same time, inquired⁠—</p>
			<p>“I say, old boy, where do you hang out?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick replied that he was at present suspended at the George and Vulture.</p>
			<p>“I wish you’d come and see me,” said Bob Sawyer.</p>
			<p>“Nothing would give me greater pleasure,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“There’s my lodgings,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer, producing a card. “Lant Street, Borough; it’s near Guy’s, and handy for me, you know. Little distance after you’ve passed <abbr>St.</abbr> George’s Church⁠—turns out of the High Street on the right hand side the way.”</p>
			<p>“I shall find it,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“Come on Thursday fortnight, and bring the other chaps with you,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer; “I’m going to have a few medical fellows that night.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick expressed the pleasure it would afford him to meet the medical fellows; and after <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bob Sawyer had informed him that he meant to be very cosy, and that his friend Ben was to be one of the party, they shook hands and separated.</p>
			<p>We feel that in this place we lay ourself open to the inquiry whether <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle was whispering, during this brief conversation, to Arabella Allen; and if so, what he said; and furthermore, whether <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Snodgrass was conversing apart with Emily Wardle; and if so, what <em>he</em> said. To this, we reply, that whatever they might have said to the ladies, they said nothing at all to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tupman for eight-and-twenty miles, and that they sighed very often, refused ale and brandy, and looked gloomy. If our observant lady readers can deduce any satisfactory inferences from these facts, we beg them by all means to do so.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
