<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Descriptive of a very important proceeding on the part of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick; no less an epoch in his life, than in this history.</p>
			</header>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick’s apartments in Goswell Street, although on a limited scale, were not only of a very neat and comfortable description, but peculiarly adapted for the residence of a man of his genius and observation. His sitting-room was the first-floor front, his bedroom the second-floor front; and thus, whether he were sitting at his desk in his parlour, or standing before the dressing-glass in his dormitory, he had an equal opportunity of contemplating human nature in all the numerous phases it exhibits, in that not more populous than popular thoroughfare. His landlady, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell⁠—the relict and sole executrix of a deceased customhouse officer⁠—was a comely woman of bustling manners and agreeable appearance, with a natural genius for cooking, improved by study and long practice, into an exquisite talent. There were no children, no servants, no fowls. The only other inmates of the house were a large man and a small boy; the first a lodger, the second a production of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell’s. The large man was always home precisely at ten o’clock at night, at which hour he regularly condensed himself into the limits of a dwarfish French bedstead in the back parlour; and the infantine sports and gymnastic exercises of Master Bardell were exclusively confined to the neighbouring pavements and gutters. Cleanliness and quiet reigned throughout the house; and in it <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick’s will was law.</p>
			<p>To anyone acquainted with these points of the domestic economy of the establishment, and conversant with the admirable regulation of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick’s mind, his appearance and behaviour on the morning previous to that which had been fixed upon for the journey to Eatanswill would have been most mysterious and unaccountable. He paced the room to and fro with hurried steps, popped his head out of the window at intervals of about three minutes each, constantly referred to his watch, and exhibited many other manifestations of impatience very unusual with him. It was evident that something of great importance was in contemplation, but what that something was, not even <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell had been enabled to discover.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, at last, as that amiable female approached the termination of a prolonged dusting of the apartment.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell.</p>
			<p>“Your little boy is a very long time gone.”</p>
			<p>“Why it’s a good long way to the Borough, sir,” remonstrated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell.</p>
			<p>“Ah,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, “very true; so it is.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick relapsed into silence, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell resumed her dusting.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, at the expiration of a few minutes.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell again.</p>
			<p>“Do you think it a much greater expense to keep two people, than to keep one?”</p>
			<p>“La, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell, colouring up to the very border of her cap, as she fancied she observed a species of matrimonial twinkle in the eyes of her lodger; “La, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, what a question!”</p>
			<p>“Well, but do you?” inquired <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“That depends,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell, approaching the duster very near to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick’s elbow which was planted on the table. “That depends a good deal upon the person, you know, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick; and whether it’s a saving and careful person, sir.”</p>
			<p>“That’s very true,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, “but the person I have in my eye (here he looked very hard at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell) I think possesses these qualities; and has, moreover, a considerable knowledge of the world, and a great deal of sharpness, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell, which may be of material use to me.”</p>
			<p>“La, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell, the crimson rising to her cap-border again.</p>
			<p>“I do,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, growing energetic, as was his wont in speaking of a subject which interested him⁠—“I do, indeed; and to tell you the truth, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell, I have made up my mind.”</p>
			<p>“Dear me, sir,” exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell.</p>
			<p>“You’ll think it very strange now,” said the amiable <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, with a good-humoured glance at his companion, “that I never consulted you about this matter, and never even mentioned it, till I sent your little boy out this morning⁠—eh?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell could only reply by a look. She had long worshipped <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick at a distance, but here she was, all at once, raised to a pinnacle to which her wildest and most extravagant hopes had never dared to aspire. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick was going to propose⁠—a deliberate plan, too⁠—sent her little boy to the Borough, to get him out of the way⁠—how thoughtful⁠—how considerate!</p>
			<p>“Well,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, “what do you think?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell, trembling with agitation, “you’re very kind, sir.”</p>
			<p>“It’ll save you a good deal of trouble, won’t it?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I never thought anything of the trouble, sir,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell; “and, of course, I should take more trouble to please you then, than ever; but it is so kind of you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, to have so much consideration for my loneliness.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, to be sure,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick; “I never thought of that. When I am in town, you’ll always have somebody to sit with you. To be sure, so you will.”</p>
			<p>“I am sure I ought to be a very happy woman,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell.</p>
			<p>“And your little boy⁠—” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“Bless his heart!” interposed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell, with a maternal sob.</p>
			<p>“He, too, will have a companion,” resumed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, “a lively one, who’ll teach him, I’ll be bound, more tricks in a week than he would ever learn in a year.” And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick smiled placidly.</p>
			<p>“Oh, you dear⁠—” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick started.</p>
			<p>“Oh, you kind, good, playful dear,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell; and without more ado, she rose from her chair, and flung her arms round <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick’s neck, with a cataract of tears and a chorus of sobs.</p>
			<p>“Bless my soul,” cried the astonished <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick; “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell, my good woman⁠—dear me, what a situation⁠—pray consider.⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell, don’t⁠—if anybody should come⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, let them come,” exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell frantically; “I’ll never leave you⁠—dear, kind, good soul;” and, with these words, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell clung the tighter.</p>
			<p>“Mercy upon me,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, struggling violently, “I hear somebody coming up the stairs. Don’t, don’t, there’s a good creature, don’t.” But entreaty and remonstrance were alike unavailing; for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell had fainted in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick’s arms; and before he could gain time to deposit her on a chair, Master Bardell entered the room, ushering in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tupman, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Snodgrass.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick was struck motionless and speechless. He stood with his lovely burden in his arms, gazing vacantly on the countenances of his friends, without the slightest attempt at recognition or explanation. They, in their turn, stared at him; and Master Bardell, in his turn, stared at everybody.</p>
			<p>The astonishment of the Pickwickians was so absorbing, and the perplexity of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick was so extreme, that they might have remained in exactly the same relative situations until the suspended animation of the lady was restored, had it not been for a most beautiful and touching expression of filial affection on the part of her youthful son. Clad in a tight suit of corduroy, spangled with brass buttons of a very considerable size, he at first stood at the door astounded and uncertain; but by degrees, the impression that his mother must have suffered some personal damage pervaded his partially developed mind, and considering <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick as the aggressor, he set up an appalling and semi-earthly kind of howling, and butting forward with his head, commenced assailing that immortal gentleman about the back and legs, with such blows and pinches as the strength of his arm, and the violence of his excitement, allowed.</p>
			<p>“Take this little villain away,” said the agonised <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, “he’s mad.”</p>
			<p>“What is the matter?” said the three tongue-tied Pickwickians.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick pettishly. “Take away the boy.” (Here <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle carried the interesting boy, screaming and struggling, to the farther end of the apartment.) “Now help me, lead this woman downstairs.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I am better now,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell faintly.</p>
			<p>“Let me lead you downstairs,” said the ever-gallant <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tupman.</p>
			<p>“Thank you, sir⁠—thank you;” exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell hysterically. And downstairs she was led accordingly, accompanied by her affectionate son.</p>
			<p>“I cannot conceive,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick when his friend returned⁠—“I cannot conceive what has been the matter with that woman. I had merely announced to her my intention of keeping a manservant, when she fell into the extraordinary paroxysm in which you found her. Very extraordinary thing.”</p>
			<p>“Very,” said his three friends.</p>
			<p>“Placed me in such an extremely awkward situation,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“Very,” was the reply of his followers, as they coughed slightly, and looked dubiously at each other.</p>
			<p>This behaviour was not lost upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick. He remarked their incredulity. They evidently suspected him.</p>
			<p>“There is a man in the passage now,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tupman.</p>
			<p>“It’s the man I spoke to you about,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick; “I sent for him to the Borough this morning. Have the goodness to call him up, Snodgrass.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Snodgrass did as he was desired; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Samuel Weller forthwith presented himself.</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—you remember me, I suppose?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“I should think so,” replied Sam, with a patronising wink. “Queer start that “ere, but he was one too many for you, warn’t he? Up to snuff and a pinch or two over⁠—eh?”</p>
			<p>“Never mind that matter now,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick hastily; “I want to speak to you about something else. Sit down.”</p>
			<p>“Thank’ee, sir,” said Sam. And down he sat without further bidding, having previously deposited his old white hat on the landing outside the door. “ ’Tain’t a wery good ’un to look at,” said Sam, “but it’s an astonishin’ ’un to wear; and afore the brim went, it was a wery handsome tile. Hows’ever it’s lighter without it, that’s one thing, and every hole lets in some air, that’s another⁠—wentilation gossamer I calls it.” On the delivery of this sentiment, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller smiled agreeably upon the assembled Pickwickians.</p>
			<p>“Now with regard to the matter on which I, with the concurrence of these gentlemen, sent for you,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“That’s the pint, sir,” interposed Sam; “out vith it, as the father said to his child, when he swallowed a farden.”</p>
			<p>“We want to know, in the first place,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, “whether you have any reason to be discontented with your present situation.”</p>
			<p>“Afore I answers that “ere question, gen’l’m’n,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller, “I should like to know, in the first place, whether you’re a-goin’ to purwide me with a better?”</p>
			<p>A sunbeam of placid benevolence played on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick’s features as he said, “I have half made up my mind to engage you myself.”</p>
			<p>“Have you, though?” said Sam.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick nodded in the affirmative.</p>
			<p>“Wages?” inquired Sam.</p>
			<p>“Twelve pounds a year,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“Clothes?”</p>
			<p>“Two suits.”</p>
			<p>“Work?”</p>
			<p>“To attend upon me; and travel about with me and these gentlemen here.”</p>
			<p>“Take the bill down,” said Sam emphatically. “I’m let to a single gentleman, and the terms is agreed upon.”</p>
			<p>“You accept the situation?” inquired <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“Cert’nly,” replied Sam. “If the clothes fits me half as well as the place, they’ll do.”</p>
			<p>“You can get a character of course?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“Ask the landlady o” the White Hart about that, Sir,” replied Sam.</p>
			<p>“Can you come this evening?”</p>
			<p>“I’ll get into the clothes this minute, if they’re here,” said Sam, with great alacrity.</p>
			<p>“Call at eight this evening,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick; “and if the inquiries are satisfactory, they shall be provided.”</p>
			<p>With the single exception of one amiable indiscretion, in which an assistant housemaid had equally participated, the history of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller’s conduct was so very blameless, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick felt fully justified in closing the engagement that very evening. With the promptness and energy which characterised not only the public proceedings, but all the private actions of this extraordinary man, he at once led his new attendant to one of those convenient emporiums where gentlemen’s new and secondhand clothes are provided, and the troublesome and inconvenient formality of measurement dispensed with; and before night had closed in, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller was furnished with a grey coat with the P. C. button, a black hat with a cockade to it, a pink striped waistcoat, light breeches and gaiters, and a variety of other necessaries, too numerous to recapitulate.</p>
			<p>“Well,” said that suddenly-transformed individual, as he took his seat on the outside of the Eatanswill coach next morning; “I wonder whether I’m meant to be a footman, or a groom, or a gamekeeper, or a seedsman. I looks like a sort of compo of every one on ’em. Never mind; there’s a change of air, plenty to see, and little to do; and all this suits my complaint uncommon; so long life to the Pickvicks, says I!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
