<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Which contains a brief account of the progress of the action of Bardell against Pickwick.</p>
			</header>
			<p>Having accomplished the main end and object of his journey, by the exposure of Jingle, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick resolved on immediately returning to London, with the view of becoming acquainted with the proceedings which had been taken against him, in the meantime, by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Messrs.</abbr> Dodson and Fogg. Acting upon this resolution with all the energy and decision of his character, he mounted to the back seat of the first coach which left Ipswich on the morning after the memorable occurrences detailed at length in the two preceding chapters; and accompanied by his three friends, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Samuel Weller, arrived in the metropolis, in perfect health and safety, the same evening.</p>
			<p>Here the friends, for a short time, separated. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Messrs.</abbr> Tupman, Winkle, and Snodgrass repaired to their several homes to make such preparations as might be requisite for their forthcoming visit to Dingley Dell; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick and Sam took up their present abode in very good, old-fashioned, and comfortable quarters, to wit, the George and Vulture Tavern and Hotel, George Yard, Lombard Street.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick had dined, finished his second pint of particular port, pulled his silk handkerchief over his head, put his feet on the fender, and thrown himself back in an easy-chair, when the entrance of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller with his carpetbag, aroused him from his tranquil meditation.</p>
			<p>“Sam,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller.</p>
			<p>“I have just been thinking, Sam,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, “that having left a good many things at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell’s, in Goswell Street, I ought to arrange for taking them away, before I leave town again.”</p>
			<p>“Wery good, sir,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller.</p>
			<p>“I could send them to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tupman’s, for the present, Sam,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, “but before we take them away, it is necessary that they should be looked up, and put together. I wish you would step up to Goswell Street, Sam, and arrange about it.”</p>
			<p>“At once, Sir?” inquired <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller.</p>
			<p>“At once,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick. “And stay, Sam,” added <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick, pulling out his purse, “there is some rent to pay. The quarter is not due till Christmas, but you may pay it, and have done with it. A month’s notice terminates my tenancy. Here it is, written out. Give it, and tell <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell she may put a bill up, as soon as she likes.”</p>
			<p>“Wery good, sir,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller; “anythin’ more, sir?”</p>
			<p>“Nothing more, Sam.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller stepped slowly to the door, as if he expected something more; slowly opened it, slowly stepped out, and had slowly closed it within a couple of inches, when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick called out⁠—</p>
			<p>“Sam.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller, stepping quickly back, and closing the door behind him.</p>
			<p>“I have no objection, Sam, to your endeavouring to ascertain how <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell herself seems disposed towards me, and whether it is really probable that this vile and groundless action is to be carried to extremity. I say I do not object to you doing this, if you wish it, Sam,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick.</p>
			<p>Sam gave a short nod of intelligence, and left the room. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick drew the silk handkerchief once more over his head, and composed himself for a nap. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller promptly walked forth, to execute his commission.</p>
			<p>It was nearly nine o’clock when he reached Goswell Street. A couple of candles were burning in the little front parlour, and a couple of caps were reflected on the window-blind. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell had got company.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller knocked at the door, and after a pretty long interval⁠—occupied by the party without, in whistling a tune, and by the party within, in persuading a refractory flat candle to allow itself to be lighted⁠—a pair of small boots pattered over the floor-cloth, and Master Bardell presented himself.</p>
			<p>“Well, young townskip,” said Sam, “how’s mother?”</p>
			<p>“She’s pretty well,” replied Master Bardell, “so am I.”</p>
			<p>“Well, that’s a mercy,” said Sam; “tell her I want to speak to her, will you, my hinfant fernomenon?”</p>
			<p>Master Bardell, thus adjured, placed the refractory flat candle on the bottom stair, and vanished into the front parlour with his message.</p>
			<p>The two caps, reflected on the window-blind, were the respective headdresses of a couple of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell’s most particular acquaintance, who had just stepped in, to have a quiet cup of tea, and a little warm supper of a couple of sets of pettitoes and some toasted cheese. The cheese was simmering and browning away, most delightfully, in a little Dutch oven before the fire; the pettitoes were getting on deliciously in a little tin saucepan on the hob; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell and her two friends were getting on very well, also, in a little quiet conversation about and concerning all their particular friends and acquaintance; when Master Bardell came back from answering the door, and delivered the message entrusted to him by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Samuel Weller.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick’s servant!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell, turning pale.</p>
			<p>“Bless my soul!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins.</p>
			<p>“Well, I raly would <em>not</em> ha’ believed it, unless I had ha’ happened to ha’ been here!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sanders.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins was a little, brisk, busy-looking woman; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sanders was a big, fat, heavy-faced personage; and the two were the company.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell felt it proper to be agitated; and as none of the three exactly knew whether under existing circumstances, any communication, otherwise than through Dodson &amp; Fogg, ought to be held with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick’s servant, they were all rather taken by surprise. In this state of indecision, obviously the first thing to be done, was to thump the boy for finding <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller at the door. So his mother thumped him, and he cried melodiously.</p>
			<p>“Hold your noise⁠—do⁠—you naughty creetur!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell.</p>
			<p>“Yes; don’t worrit your poor mother,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sanders.</p>
			<p>“She’s quite enough to worrit her, as it is, without you, Tommy,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins, with sympathising resignation.</p>
			<p>“Ah! worse luck, poor lamb!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sanders.</p>
			<p>At all which moral reflections, Master Bardell howled the louder.</p>
			<p>“Now, what <em>shall</em> I do?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins.</p>
			<p>“<em>I</em> think you ought to see him,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins. “But on no account without a witness.”</p>
			<p>“<em>I</em> think two witnesses would be more lawful,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sanders, who, like the other friend, was bursting with curiosity.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps he’d better come in here,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell.</p>
			<p>“To be sure,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins, eagerly catching at the idea; “walk in, young man; and shut the street door first, please.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller immediately took the hint; and presenting himself in the parlour, explained his business to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell thus⁠—</p>
			<p>“Wery sorry to ’casion any personal inconwenience, ma’am, as the housebreaker said to the old lady when he put her on the fire; but as me and my governor’s only jest come to town, and is jest going away agin, it can’t be helped, you see.”</p>
			<p>“Of course, the young man can’t help the faults of his master,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins, much struck by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller’s appearance and conversation.</p>
			<p>“Certainly not,” chimed in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sanders, who, from certain wistful glances at the little tin saucepan, seemed to be engaged in a mental calculation of the probable extent of the pettitoes, in the event of Sam’s being asked to stop to supper.</p>
			<p>“So all I’ve come about, is jest this here,” said Sam, disregarding the interruption; “first, to give my governor’s notice⁠—there it is. Secondly, to pay the rent⁠—here it is. Thirdly, to say as all his things is to be put together, and give to anybody as we sends for ’em. Fourthly, that you may let the place as soon as you like⁠—and that’s all.”</p>
			<p>“Whatever has happened,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell, “I always have said, and always will say, that in every respect but one, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick has always behaved himself like a perfect gentleman. His money always as good as the bank⁠—always.”</p>
			<p>As <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell said this, she applied her handkerchief to her eyes, and went out of the room to get the receipt.</p>
			<p>Sam well knew that he had only to remain quiet, and the women were sure to talk; so he looked alternately at the tin saucepan, the toasted cheese, the wall, and the ceiling, in profound silence.</p>
			<p>“Poor dear!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins.</p>
			<p>“Ah, poor thing!” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sanders.</p>
			<p>Sam said nothing. He saw they were coming to the subject.</p>
			<p>“I raly cannot contain myself,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins, “when I think of such perjury. I don’t wish to say anything to make you uncomfortable, young man, but your master’s an old brute, and I wish I had him here to tell him so.”</p>
			<p>“I wish you had,” said Sam.</p>
			<p>“To see how dreadful she takes on, going moping about, and taking no pleasure in nothing, except when her friends comes in, out of charity, to sit with her, and make her comfortable,” resumed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins, glancing at the tin saucepan and the Dutch oven, “it’s shocking!”</p>
			<p>“Barbareous,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sanders.</p>
			<p>“And your master, young man! A gentleman with money, as could never feel the expense of a wife, no more than nothing,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins, with great volubility; “why there ain’t the faintest shade of an excuse for his behaviour! Why don’t he marry her?”</p>
			<p>“Ah,” said Sam, “to be sure; that’s the question.”</p>
			<p>“Question, indeed,” retorted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins, “she’d question him, if she’d my spirit. Hows’ever, there <em>is</em> law for us women, mis’rable creeturs as they’d make us, if they could; and that your master will find out, young man, to his cost, afore he’s six months older.”</p>
			<p>At this consolatory reflection, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins bridled up, and smiled at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sanders, who smiled back again.</p>
			<p>“The action’s going on, and no mistake,” thought Sam, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell reentered with the receipt.</p>
			<p>“Here’s the receipt, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell, “and here’s the change, and I hope you’ll take a little drop of something to keep the cold out, if it’s only for old acquaintance’ sake, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller.”</p>
			<p>Sam saw the advantage he should gain, and at once acquiesced; whereupon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell produced, from a small closet, a black bottle and a wineglass; and so great was her abstraction, in her deep mental affliction, that, after filling <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller’s glass, she brought out three more wineglasses, and filled them too.</p>
			<p>“Lauk, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins, “see what you’ve been and done!”</p>
			<p>“Well, that is a good one!” ejaculated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sanders.</p>
			<p>“Ah, my poor head!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell, with a faint smile.</p>
			<p>Sam understood all this, of course, so he said at once, that he never could drink before supper, unless a lady drank with him. A great deal of laughter ensued, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sanders volunteered to humour him, so she took a slight sip out of her glass. Then Sam said it must go all round, so they all took a slight sip. Then little <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins proposed as a toast, “Success to Bardell agin Pickwick”; and then the ladies emptied their glasses in honour of the sentiment, and got very talkative directly.</p>
			<p>“I suppose you’ve heard what’s going forward, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell.</p>
			<p>“I’ve heerd somethin’ on it,” replied Sam.</p>
			<p>“It’s a terrible thing to be dragged before the public, in that way, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell; “but I see now, that it’s the only thing I ought to do, and my lawyers, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dodson and Fogg, tell me that, with the evidence as we shall call, we must succeed. I don’t know what I should do, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller, if I didn’t.”</p>
			<p>The mere idea of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell’s failing in her action, affected <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sanders so deeply, that she was under the necessity of refilling and re-emptying her glass immediately; feeling, as she said afterwards, that if she hadn’t had the presence of mind to do so, she must have dropped.</p>
			<p>“Ven is it expected to come on?” inquired Sam.</p>
			<p>“Either in February or March,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell.</p>
			<p>“What a number of witnesses there’ll be, won’t there?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins.</p>
			<p>“Ah! won’t there!” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sanders.</p>
			<p>“And won’t <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dodson and Fogg be wild if the plaintiff shouldn’t get it?” added <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins, “when they do it all on speculation!”</p>
			<p>“Ah! won’t they!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sanders.</p>
			<p>“But the plaintiff must get it,” resumed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cluppins.</p>
			<p>“I hope so,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell.</p>
			<p>“Oh, there can’t be any doubt about it,” rejoined <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sanders.</p>
			<p>“Vell,” said Sam, rising and setting down his glass, “all I can say is, that I vish you <em>may</em> get it.”</p>
			<p>“Thank’ee, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell fervently.</p>
			<p>“And of them Dodson and Foggs, as does these sort o’ things on spec,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller, “as vell as for the other kind and gen’rous people o’ the same purfession, as sets people by the ears, free gratis for nothin’, and sets their clerks to work to find out little disputes among their neighbours and acquaintances as vants settlin’ by means of lawsuits⁠—all I can say o’ them is, that I vish they had the reward I’d give ’em.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, I wish they had the reward that every kind and generous heart would be inclined to bestow upon them!” said the gratified <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell.</p>
			<p>“Amen to that,” replied Sam, “and a fat and happy liven’ they’d get out of it! Wish you good night, ladies.”</p>
			<p>To the great relief of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sanders, Sam was allowed to depart without any reference, on the part of the hostess, to the pettitoes and toasted cheese; to which the ladies, with such juvenile assistance as Master Bardell could afford, soon afterwards rendered the amplest justice⁠—indeed they wholly vanished before their strenuous exertions.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller wended his way back to the George and Vulture, and faithfully recounted to his master, such indications of the sharp practice of Dodson &amp; Fogg, as he had contrived to pick up in his visit to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bardell’s. An interview with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Perker, next day, more than confirmed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weller’s statement; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pickwick was fain to prepare for his Christmas visit to Dingley Dell, with the pleasant anticipation that some two or three months afterwards, an action brought against him for damages sustained by reason of a breach of promise of marriage, would be publicly tried in the Court of Common Pleas; the plaintiff having all the advantages derivable, not only from the force of circumstances, but from the sharp practice of Dodson &amp; Fogg to boot.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
